---
layout:  
title: Places of Interest in Fellhold
date: '2016-06-13T07:00:00.000-07:00'
author: Jeff Russell
categories:
- Gaming
tags:
- Fellhold Reboot
- Urbancrawl
- OSR
- Fellhold
- D&D
modified_time: '2016-06-13T19:31:53.707-07:00'
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-7657840612384361644.post-5453834920462378259
blogger_orig_url: https://blessingsofthedicegods.blogspot.com/2016/06/places-of-interest-in-fellhold.html
---

 <https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/236x/2c/ab/5b/2cab5b15d229d430e5a56741489829d0.jpg> 
  

  
As I've mentioned in a few previous posts, I am in the process of pretty extensively overhauling my homebrew setting *Fellhold*. As a part of that, I've been drafting some tables to help with stocking the place, which is an enormous, largely ruined city where the dungeon and the urban run together pretty fluidly. Below are the tables for "Places of Interest", which are the handful of places within a district likely worth looking into in more detail, also usable to detail out something that catches the players' attention in play.  
  
The debt owed to *Yoon-Suin*, *Vornheim*, and others like it should be pretty darn clear, but there will be a more extensive bibliography forthcoming.  
  

**Place of Interest Generation**  These tables serve two primary purposes: stocking new districts as part of preparation before play, and creating interesting locations on the fly during play. They are not intended to represent every single building or place within Fellhold, but instead, only the interesting ones. As always, you may use as few or as many columns as needed in a given situation. For example, you might only roll on the column for type of business/housing if your players burst into a random building and wonder what type it is. Note that the results are tilted more towards “interesting and weird” than “verisimilitudinous” - if you desire random buildings of a more mundane sort, I direct you to the great many previous supplements that have covered this, including the author’s own hack of *Middenheim*.  
  
When interpreting the results on these tables, as always, consider their physical context. What is the surrounding district? How does this place fit into that? How does it interact with any factions active there, if at all?  
  

**Type**  Places of interest come in three types. Numbers are provided to randomize if you know you need “a place of interest”, but not what sort of place. You may wish to reverse the chances of *Lair* and *Business & Housing* results in a ruined district. 
  

1-2: *Lair* - something more dangerous than the average inhabitant lives here, and probably has treasure and defenses of some sort.   3-5: *Business & Housing* - relatively “normal” buildings of the city, but with something to make them of interest to adventurers.  6: *Landmark* - An especially noteworthy place or thing by which inhabitants navigate their district. 
  

**Lairs**  Lair inhabitants may be tied to a faction if desired, but generally represent more of a “wild card” outside of normal social context, or perhaps a faction of their own. Some will suggest ties to existing factions more than others (criminals, fleshcrafters), while others will stand out as candidates to be factions in their own right (Master Wizards, Bog Mummies). If a random faction is desired, use the same procedure as for any other NPC. For the number appearing, treasure, and other details, refer to the relevant entry in the bestiary. As always, it is left to the enterprising referee to ignore or reconcile any seemingly contradictory or nonsensical results in whichever way best serves their game.  *   *  <table> <colgroup> <col width="20%" /> <col width="20%" /> <col width="20%" /> <col width="20%" /> <col width="20%" /> </colgroup> <tbody> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> <strong>Roll</strong> </div></td> <td><div> <strong>Inhabitant(s)</strong> </div></td> <td><div> <strong>Physical Space</strong> </div></td> <td><div> <strong>Spice</strong> </div></td> <td><div> <strong>Relationship with Surrounding District</strong> </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 1 </div></td> <td><div> Human Criminals </div></td> <td><div> Hidden within an unremarkable mundane building (roll on the “nature/purpose” column of the Business and Housing table) </div></td> <td><div> Addict of some kind </div></td> <td><div> Feared and appeased </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 2 </div></td> <td><div> Ratmen Criminals </div></td> <td><div> Beneath a mundane building (basement, sewer, lower level of ruins, etc.) </div></td> <td><div> Actually kindly and well-meaning </div></td> <td><div> Hidden and unknown </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 3 </div></td> <td><div> Crabmen Criminals </div></td> <td><div> Above a mundane building (attic, higher level of a tower, closer to ground level, etc.) </div></td> <td><div> Desperately wants something a random faction has </div></td> <td><div> Accepted as part of the district’s “character&quot; </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 4 </div></td> <td><div> Half Dwarf Criminals </div></td> <td><div> Gaudy and obviously self-constructed dwelling </div></td> <td><div> Ambitious and expansive, desires agents in the wider city </div></td> <td><div> Actively loved or worshipped </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 5 </div></td> <td><div> Minor Demon </div></td> <td><div> Opulent Home </div></td> <td><div> Has a random job it wants accomplished </div></td> <td><div> Hemmed in and oppressed by </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 6 </div></td> <td><div> Major Demon </div></td> <td><div> A fortified compound </div></td> <td><div> Actually crazy - different personality and goals every time visited </div></td> <td><div> Pleased by the inhabitants </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 7 </div></td> <td><div> Troll </div></td> <td><div> A storefront, with an accurate sign </div></td> <td><div> Is also a sage in a very narrow field, in addition to anything else </div></td> <td><div> Wants to clear out “the rabble&quot; </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 8 </div></td> <td><div> Solitary Witch </div></td> <td><div> A mobile home of some kind, temporarily stopped here (vardo, tents, etc) </div></td> <td><div> Is also a fence for a highly specific good </div></td> <td><div> An unsatisfactory temporary base </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 9 </div></td> <td><div> Three Witches </div></td> <td><div> On stilts above boggy, brackish water </div></td> <td><div> In the middle of performing a weeks-long ritual, to mysterious ends </div></td> <td><div> Believes it has such potential, if only. . . </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 10 </div></td> <td><div> Vampire </div></td> <td><div> A Library </div></td> <td><div> Collects a highly specific good, and will pay well for examples of it </div></td> <td><div> Despises their own dependence on it </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 11 </div></td> <td><div> Bog Mummy </div></td> <td><div> A nest built from found objects, especially shiny ones </div></td> <td><div> Has strange sexual proclivities, and will pay to satisfy them </div></td> <td><div> Wants to make all of it more like their home </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 12 </div></td> <td><div> Wizard </div></td> <td><div> A damp and mossy tunnel </div></td> <td><div> Secretly not at all what they seem - roll again on table of your choice for real identity </div></td> <td><div> Wants to make their home more like it </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 13 </div></td> <td><div> Master Wizard </div></td> <td><div> Hasty camp every night, moves around, 1/6 chance of changing districts every week </div></td> <td><div> Secretly an agent of a random faction </div></td> <td><div> Actively hunted by </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 14 </div></td> <td><div> Beast </div></td> <td><div> Hole burrowed into surrounding material </div></td> <td><div> Terribly lonely - really just wants to talk to someone for awhile (but may still want to eat them after) </div></td> <td><div> Somehow preys on </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 15 </div></td> <td><div> Ratmen Fleshcrafters </div></td> <td><div> A ruined building </div></td> <td><div> Requires subjects for bizarre experiments or decadent games </div></td> <td><div> Demands payment for protection from other threats </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 16 </div></td> <td><div> Cell of a Conspiracy </div></td> <td><div> A series of platforms suspended by ropes </div></td> <td><div> Possesses a highly accurate map of surrounding districts, allowing movement at twice normal speed through this district and all connected to it </div></td> <td><div> Fascinated by their strange behavior </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 17 </div></td> <td><div> Ghouls </div></td> <td><div> The former shrine of a dead god </div></td> <td><div> Always, always hungry </div></td> <td><div> Spies on them and collects secrets </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 18 </div></td> <td><div> Freedmen Zombies </div></td> <td><div> A cramped apartment </div></td> <td><div> Believes in a radical political philosophy (may be part of an existing faction if one fits the bill) </div></td> <td><div> Wants to make them all more like itself </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 19 </div></td> <td><div> Dangerous Fungus </div></td> <td><div> Between the walls of local housing </div></td> <td><div> Believe themselves to be a rising god, deserving worship </div></td> <td><div> Wants to maintain the status quo </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 20 </div></td> <td><div> Dangerous Addicts </div></td> <td><div> A shanty in an alley </div></td> <td><div> Hoards something worthless and gross, the place is full of whatever it is </div></td> <td><div> Wants to take as much as possible from them and move on </div></td> </tr> </tbody> </table> 
  

*   *  **Business & Housing**  Note that it is not required, or necessarily desirable, to give this full treatment to every single place of business or housing the players interact with. These tables are more appropriate when preparing a new district’s pre-defined places of interest, if a location is needed for a job, rumor, or conspiracy, when complications arise from the urbancrawl action, or a place is otherwise intended to be a source of ongoing adventure fuel. That being said, if the players are just poking around and have no clear aims in mind, these places can be starting points, suggesting further contacts, jobs, and factional intrigues.  
  

*NPCs*  Generally you will want to generate the owner/proprietor, or a major inhabitant for any place generated. If other NPCs become relevant, assume a number of people in the site consistent with its purpose and the time of day (a bar might have very few people in the middle of the afternoon and very many late at night, while a warehouse would be the opposite). If not obvious, assume 2d6 inhabitants/customers at any given time. If specific detail is needed, generate using the table for new contacts, but assume their career is tied to the place, unless it makes sense to have all sorts of careers there (like in a bar).  
  

*Treasure*  Location will have treasure in keeping with the owner/proprietor, multiplied by the appropriate wealth level. Some locations will suggest further treasure (like a bank) and should be stocked accordingly. 
  

<table> <colgroup> <col width="20%" /> <col width="20%" /> <col width="20%" /> <col width="20%" /> <col width="20%" /> </colgroup> <tbody> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> <strong>Roll</strong> </div></td> <td><div> <strong>Nature/Purpose</strong> </div></td> <td><div> <strong>Wealth Level</strong> </div></td> <td><div> <strong>Spice</strong> </div></td> <td><div> <strong>Faction Ties</strong> </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 1 </div></td> <td><div> Tenement/Apartments (run by a generic NPC) </div></td> <td><div> Significantly Poorer than District </div></td> <td><div> Unhappy about the protection money they pay the district’s controlling faction </div></td> <td><div> Loyal to the faction whose turf this district is </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 2 </div></td> <td><div> Slaughterhouse (run by a Merchant) </div></td> <td><div> Significantly Poorer than District </div></td> <td><div> Actually a front for a criminal activity of some kind (run by a patron or fence instead of the usual type) </div></td> <td><div> Loyal to the faction whose turf this district is </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 3 </div></td> <td><div> Tattoo Shop (run by a Sage) </div></td> <td><div> Significantly Poorer than District </div></td> <td><div> Employer, home, or gathering place of an underground fighting ring - everyone here likes to rumble and is good at it </div></td> <td><div> Loyal to the faction whose turf this district is </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 4 </div></td> <td><div> Cunning Man/Woman (run by a Sage) </div></td> <td><div> Significantly Poorer than District </div></td> <td><div> Inhabitant/proprietor having an affair with a member of a rival faction </div></td> <td><div> Loyal to the faction whose turf this district is </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 5 </div></td> <td><div> Tavern (run by 1-3 a Merchant, 4-6 a patron) </div></td> <td><div> Poorer than District </div></td> <td><div> Unusually good place to pick up rumors - roll an extra time on any rumor table when seeking rumors here </div></td> <td><div> Loyal to the faction whose turf this district is </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 6 </div></td> <td><div> Inn (run by a Merchant) </div></td> <td><div> Poorer than District </div></td> <td><div> In addition to anything else, also a landmark </div></td> <td><div> Member of a faction hostile to this district’s controlling faction </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 7 </div></td> <td><div> Warehouse (run by a Merchant) </div></td> <td><div> Poorer than District </div></td> <td><div> In addition to anything else, also a lair </div></td> <td><div> Member of a faction hostile to this district’s controlling faction </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 8 </div></td> <td><div> Pawn Shop (run by a Fence) </div></td> <td><div> Poorer than District </div></td> <td><div> Inhabitants/proprietor know the location of a mighty treasure or evidence of a valuable secret, but not what it is or who owns it </div></td> <td><div> Member of a faction hostile to this district’s controlling faction </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 9 </div></td> <td><div> Townhouse </div> <div> (run by a random NPC type) </div></td> <td><div> Consistent with District </div></td> <td><div> Remarkably friendly inhabitants/proprietor - offer help/service above and beyond what you’d expect </div></td> <td><div> Member of a faction hostile to this district’s controlling faction </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 10 </div></td> <td><div> Marketplace (run by a Merchant) </div></td> <td><div> Consistent with District </div></td> <td><div> Remarkably antagonistic inhabitants/proprietor - will actively hinder player characters as much as possible, regardless of faction allegiance </div></td> <td><div> Member of a faction hostile to this district’s controlling faction </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 11 </div></td> <td><div> Weapons Shop (1-2 Blades, 3-5 Mining Weapons, 6 Firearms) (run by a Merchant) </div></td> <td><div> Consistent with District </div></td> <td><div> Actually a front for a conspiracy of some kind (run by a patron rather than the usual type) </div></td> <td><div> Random faction </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 12 </div></td> <td><div> Armorer (1-3 Cloth, 4-5 Leather, 6 Metal) (run by a Merchant) </div></td> <td><div> Consistent with District </div></td> <td><div> Inhabitants/proprietor extremely lonely - eager for extended social contact with new people </div></td> <td><div> Random faction </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 13 </div></td> <td><div> Tobacconist (run by a Merchant) </div></td> <td><div> Wealthier than District </div></td> <td><div> Inhabitants/proprietor know the description of a mighty treasure or evidence of a valuable secret, but not where to find it or who owns it </div></td> <td><div> Random faction </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 14 </div></td> <td><div> General Store (run by a Merchant) </div></td> <td><div> Wealthier than District </div></td> <td><div> Whatever is done here is extraordinarily flammable and/or explosive, and this place is entirely made of wood </div></td> <td><div> Random faction </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 15 </div></td> <td><div> Artist’s Studio (run by a Sage) </div></td> <td><div> Wealthier than District </div></td> <td><div> Inhabitants/proprietor know the owner of a mighty treasure or evidence of a valuable secret, but not where or what it is </div></td> <td><div> Random faction </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 16 </div></td> <td><div> Coffee House (run by 1-3 a Sage, 4-6 a patron) </div></td> <td><div> Wealthier than District </div></td> <td><div> Building is of an exotic type for the surrounding district </div></td> <td><div> Surprisingly Neutral </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 17 </div></td> <td><div> Bookstore (generate as a library, but books are for sale) (run by a Sage) </div></td> <td><div> Significantly Wealthier than District </div></td> <td><div> Inhabitant/Proprietor is of an exotic type for the surrounding district (e.g. crabman in a ratman district, troll anywhere, etc) </div></td> <td><div> Surprisingly Neutral </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 18 </div></td> <td><div> Library (run by a Sage) </div></td> <td><div> Significantly Wealthier than District </div></td> <td><div> Secret access to a method of easy movement to another district (tunnels, walkways, portals, etc) </div></td> <td><div> Surprisingly Neutral </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 19 </div></td> <td><div> Brothel (run by a Patron) </div></td> <td><div> Significantly Wealthier than District </div></td> <td><div> Actually the exact opposite of apparent wealth level. If “average”, secretly wealthy. </div></td> <td><div> Surprisingly Neutral </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 20 </div></td> <td><div> Bank (run by a Merchant) </div></td> <td><div> Significantly Wealthier than District </div></td> <td><div> Inhabitant/Proprietor owes a favor to a powerful patron, doesn’t especially want to pay it back </div></td> <td><div> Surprisingly Neutral </div></td> </tr> </tbody> </table>  **   **  **Landmarks**  Landmarks provide the baseline for navigation within a district. They are known and obvious to anyone who spends any amount of time in or near the district. Assume that all landmarks are known by all Fellhold residents unless the district is especially far underground and out of contact with the city near the surface. When crawling within a district, landmarks should be placed on the map, or at least their direction indicated as known points of reference. If a landmark is the target of intentional movement (for example “meet me at the Statue of Akatziroi’s ascension to lichdom”) then there is no chance of getting lost (but still check for encounters as usual). There’s usually one to three per district, but not every district necessarily has landmarks. 
  

<table> <colgroup> <col width="25%" /> <col width="25%" /> <col width="25%" /> <col width="25%" /> </colgroup> <tbody> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> <strong>Roll</strong> </div></td> <td><div> <strong>Type</strong> </div></td> <td><div> <strong>Why is it Noteworthy?</strong> </div></td> <td><div> <strong>How is it Regarded by the District?</strong> </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 1 </div></td> <td><div> Business </div></td> <td><div> Remarkably intricate and beautiful architecture or carving </div></td> <td><div> A sort of emblem or mascot </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 2 </div></td> <td><div> Housing </div></td> <td><div> Especially well-preserved example of dwarven pre-invasion style </div></td> <td><div> Something to boast about and feel ownership of </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 3 </div></td> <td><div> Fountain or Well </div></td> <td><div> It unusual or unexpected for it to be located where it is </div></td> <td><div> Feared and hated </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 4 </div></td> <td><div> Bridge </div></td> <td><div> Remarkably shoddy and unstable </div></td> <td><div> A perverse sense of pride </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 5 </div></td> <td><div> Plinth or Column </div></td> <td><div> Conveys a detailed history of the reign of a Famous Witch King </div></td> <td><div> The source of their prosperity (or lack thereof) </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 6 </div></td> <td><div> Statue </div></td> <td><div> Its enormous size </div></td> <td><div> Slight embarrassment for being associated with it </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 7 </div></td> <td><div> Canal or Dock </div></td> <td><div> Popular destination for tourists from other districts </div></td> <td><div> A necessary source of annoyance </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 8 </div></td> <td><div> Shrine </div></td> <td><div> Kept in immaculate condition by unknown benefactors </div></td> <td><div> Kind of creepy, but probably harmless </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 9 </div></td> <td><div> Rare Uncarved Rock </div></td> <td><div> A folk hero of a random faction was killed here </div></td> <td><div> Useful for navigation, that’s all </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 10 </div></td> <td><div> Original Growth Tree </div></td> <td><div> Is the locus of a powerful demon </div></td> <td><div> Neutral ground for important meetings </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 11 </div></td> <td><div> Intersection </div></td> <td><div> It is physically impossible not to pass it if you go any distance in the district </div></td> <td><div> The cultural and spiritual center of not only their district, but all of Fellhold </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 12 </div></td> <td><div> Mural </div></td> <td><div> An especially tasteful example of crabman style </div></td> <td><div> A kind of sanctuary, won’t prosecute violence there </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 13 </div></td> <td><div> Frieze </div></td> <td><div> Noteworthy example of pre-invasion Witch Kingdom style </div></td> <td><div> Kitschy and tasteless, but with a certain charm </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 14 </div></td> <td><div> Stairway </div></td> <td><div> Surprisingly tiny for what it is </div></td> <td><div> Superstitious - requires ritual every time passed </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 15 </div></td> <td><div> Open Space </div></td> <td><div> A random faction regards it as their territory, posts guards </div></td> <td><div> Shunned and avoided as much as possible </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 16 </div></td> <td><div> Marketplace </div></td> <td><div> Plays host to an exotic gathering once a month </div></td> <td><div> A source of trouble and a bad influence on the youth </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 17 </div></td> <td><div> Grafitti </div></td> <td><div> A breathtakingly modern expression of daring style </div></td> <td><div> An eyesore, better gotten rid of, but no one is willing to </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 18 </div></td> <td><div> Park </div></td> <td><div> On top of or beneath a building or chamber </div></td> <td><div> A bizarre fluke </div></td> </tr> <tr class="even"> <td><div> 19 </div></td> <td><div> Sign Board or Post </div></td> <td><div> The most ancient thing known in the district </div></td> <td><div> Source of unwanted responsibility or stewardship </div></td> </tr> <tr class="odd"> <td><div> 20 </div></td> <td><div> Alley </div></td> <td><div> No one can tell who or what made it, bizarre and alien </div></td> <td><div> Almost definitely cursed somehow </div></td> </tr> </tbody> </table> 
