---
title: "The Deal with Jordan Peterson"
draft: true
---

# The Deal With Jordan Peterson

Over the past year or so, I have found myself rather often bringing up Jordan
Peterson, and many of my friends have said something like "isn't he some kind of
angry right wing nutjob?" At the same time, almost everyone knows his name, but
very many folks know very little what he is truly about. I have found his books
and his lectures helpful in better understanding psychology, myth, and
literature, so I'd like to do what I can to lay out who he is, how he came to be
well-known, why that's caused controversy, and why I find his work helpful.

Most of the below grew out of a very good talk with a friend of mine who had
heard some mostly bad things about him but wanted to understand why he was so
well-liked by others, and gave a pretty good go at trying to learn more about
him, but walked away still feeling confused. I knew how he felt because that was
my first experience of Peterson when I tried to learn more after reading his
first book. Now I think I can do a better job laying out how what he's about and
how to dig in if you'd like to learn more. Even if you don't, I hope you'll come
away from this with a clearer understanding of someone who is shaping a lot of
today's conversation.  

## Who He Is

Dr. Jordan B. Peterson is a professor of psychology at the University of Toronto
and previously Harvard whose research has mainly been in the field of
personality. Until recently, he worked as a clinical psychologist. To date he
has written two books, [*Maps of Meaning*](https://smile.amazon.com/Maps-Meaning-Architecture-Jordan-Peterson-ebook/dp/B07K6S9SJ8/ref=tmm_kin_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=1589555641&sr=8-2)
and [*12 Rules for Life: An Antidote to Chaos*](https://smile.amazon.com/12-Rules-Life-Antidote-Chaos-ebook/dp/B01FPGY5T0/ref=tmm_kin_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=1589555693&sr=8-2),
and more recently he has become well-known and seen as somewhat controversial as
a public intellectual and member of the ["intellectual dark web"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intellectual_dark_web).  

## Why You Might Have Heard of Him

Dr. Peterson first became widely known for putting out a
[pair](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fvPgjg201w0) of youtube
[videos](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f-7YGGCE9es) where
he talks about why he was standing against Canadian bill
[C16](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/An_Act_to_amend_the_Canadian_Human_Rights_Act_and_the_Criminal_Code).
The bill, now a law, which adds "gender identity or expression" to the
definition of "identifiable groups" in Canada's Human Rights Act, making that a
group that laws like hate speech and discrimination can apply to. Peterson
argued two main grounds for standing against the bill 1) that it *compelled* speech,
making it unlawful to *not* say certain words (such as someone's preferred
gender pronouns), rather most restrictions of speech in the parliamentary
tradition which can *stop* you from saying something deemed harmful, like
inciting a riot or shouting fire in a theater, and 2) that much of the grounds
for the change to the bill did not hold with scientific findings, such as
saying that gender has *nothing* to do with biology. His outlook on this did not
go over well with folks who thought the bill was doing a good thing, which led
to controversy (see [below](#why-you-might-think-he's-the-devil)).  

Before all of this happened, he was somewhat known from putting up the
[lectures](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL22J3VaeABQAT-0aSPq-OKOpQlHyR4k5h)
from the psychology class he teaches at the University of Toronto (and some from
when he taught at Harvard) that share a name with his first
[book](https://smile.amazon.com/Maps-Meaning-Architecture-Jordan-Peterson-ebook/dp/B07K6S9SJ8/ref=tmm_kin_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=1589555641&sr=8-2),
"Maps of Meaning". All of the hubbub led to more folks watching his videos, him
showing up on [podcasts](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=04wyGK6k6HE) and
[TV](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aMcjxSThD54) and the like to lay out his
thoughts, and overall more folks giving him heed than had in the past. So he
wrote a new book, [*12 Rules for Life: An Antidote to Chaos*](https://smile.amazon.com/12-Rules-Life-Antidote-Chaos-ebook/dp/B01FPGY5T0/ref=tmm_kin_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=1589555693&sr=8-2), 
which went over very well with those folks who had liked what they saw in his
videos, and with many new folks besides. All this led to him giving a lecture
tour where he built upon the thoughts in the book, which brought in lots of
folks in many cities around the world. Somewhere among all of this, he crossed
paths with a loose group of other outspoken upholders of free speech
half-jokingly named ["The Intellectual Dark
Web"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intellectual_dark_web) by [Eric
Weinstein](https://ericweinstein.org/), which holds (among others) [Sam
Harris](https://samharris.org/), [Joe Rogan](https://www.joerogan.com/), Eric
and [Brett Weinstein](https://bretweinstein.net/), [Ben
Shapiro](https://www.dailywire.com/), and [Dave Rubin](https://daverubin.com/).
Peterson and Harris had a *very* awkward [first
talk](https://samharris.org/speaking-of-truth-with-jordan-b-peterson/), but it
led to some big public talks that went a lot better.  Peterson keeps on putting
up videos on his [youtube
channel](https://www.youtube.com/user/JordanPetersonVideos)and is working on a
second book, tentatively named [*12 More Rules: Beyond
Order*](https://www.jordanbpeterson.com/podcast/s2-e40-beyond-order-another-12-rules-for-life/).In
2019 a family illness and his dealing with that led to him not putting out much
new stuff, but as of May 2020, he is tentatively working toward making more
stuff, starting with *12 More Rules*.  

## How I Came to Know About Him

I did not first find out about him through any of the above, but instead found
all that later. [Eric S. Raymond](http://esr.ibiblio.org) said something about
Peterson in a [blog post](http://esr.ibiblio.org/?p=7687), so I checked him out
and the description of [*Maps of Meaning*](https://smile.amazon.com/Maps-Meaning-Architecture-Jordan-Peterson-ebook/dp/B07K6S9SJ8/ref=tmm_kin_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=1589555641&sr=8-2)
struck me as very much something I wanted to dig into, so I picked up the book
and didn't think about it for about a year.  

Then a friend of mine sent me a link to one of Peterson's better-known
[videos](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o73pqQ9Gzt4&list=PLIBtb_NuIJ1w9GVrOrzMZbwU7Li6TAT91&index=0),
which called the book to mind, so I went ahead and read it. It was pretty heavy
sledding for me, but it talked about a lot of things I found helpful and
thought-stirring. I started looking at his other stuff online and found it
[bewildering](#why-you-might-find-his-thoughts-bewildering), even with his book
under my belt. Over time, by listening to him talk to others on podcasts and in
lectures, and by digging into some of the works he grounds his thinking in (like
[Jung](#carl-gustav-jung)) I was able to get something of a handle on what he's
about. What I'd like to do with this write-up is help you get there a bit
quicker if you'd like to do so.  

## Why You Might Think He's the Devil

Remember the bill we talked about before? Well, many of the folks who liked it
and thought it was doing good the folk of Canada saw his standing against it as
showing hatred for trans folks. This meant that the first (and often only) thing
a lot of folks heard about Peterson was "he's that guy that hates trans folks".
He has since made [clear]() in many talks that he has no problem with trans folks and would be
happy to use whatever pronouns somebody wanted, as long as it was a true asking
for respect and not a way to twist his arm to make a point.  

Further, he is outspoken against group identity politics of all kinds, but most
of what he has said has been about the group identity politics on the left. He
has said that he speaks more about Left identity politics than right because we
have a pretty good handle on what's wrong with group identity politics on the
right (if you think your nation/race is better than everybody else, end of
story, you've gone too far), whereas we have a much fuzzier idea of where the
line for "going too far" to the left is - it's likely somewhere between
government-provided healthcare and the cultural revolution, but we don't have a
good line to point to.  

All of this means that when he speaks about it being a bad idea to make some
group identity have more weight than the individual (which he talks about a fair
amount), some folks take that as him saying that he doesn't think that group
identity has any weight, or even as hating some group identity or another.
Also, some folks who don't like the far left cherry-pick what he says to pull
out the bits that talk about left-identity-politics being bad, and leave out the
bits where he talks about right-identity-politics also being bad, and then put
that out into the world to shore up their way of thinking. So, sometimes far
right or even alt-right folks end up sharing or praising something Peterson said
(usually without the nuance he included). Folks that are not fans of Peterson's
then point to such sharing and say "look, he's on the same team as these
alt-right guys".  

Lastly, Peterson has said himself that in some of his recorded interactions, he
has lost his temper when he shouldn't have, he has a biting sense of humor, and
a combative personality. These traits can make him come across as unlikable,
most of all if you're coming across him from one of the above positions. Even
worse, it is truly hard to work out everything that he means, because he talks
about many different complicated topics. Put all that together and a lot of
folks throw up their hands and say "seems like a dick to me, not worth working
out what he means."  

## Why I Don't Think He's the Devil

Peterson believes that free speech is likely the weightiest right of a free folk,
and felt that *compelled* speech, rather than *limited* speech was a bad
precedent to set, whatever good or bad grounds you might have. He also very
strongly believes in telling the truth, even when (maybe most of all when) it is
not something we like - so making out gender identity as *only* a conscious
choice, when it is truly something that comes about in *very* complicated ways
having to do with biology, family, culture, and personal experience was also not
something he wanted to be written into law.  

Having read/listened to damn near everything he's put out, I believe that he
truly means the above and that none of what he has done has been due to hate or
ignorance. I think the worst things I've seen/heard him do are lose his temper
and sometimes be too sure and smug about being right.  

## Why You Might Find His Thoughts Bewildering

As I said above, when I first started reading/listening to Peterson's stuff, I
found it pretty hard going, and that was even coming at it with certain
advantages. For one, I have a better-than-average grasp of many of the things
his work is built on like evolutionary psychology, narrative, and archetypes.
For another, I started with *Maps of Meaning*, which more thoroughly lays out
the underpinnings of his thought, whereas many of his talks and *12 Rules for
Life* give you the conclusions, but not as much of the grounding behind them.
Even with those advantages, I found it hard to know what he was talking about
until I was able to work out what some of the roadblocks to understanding him
are.  

Below, I've laid out those roadblocks and how I think best to deal with them.  

### There's A Whole Lot of Stuff

Peterson has put out a *lot* of stuff. Not only has he put out his own stuff,
but folks that like his work have chopped up clips and made reaction videos and
what have you. So, if you Google him or do a youtube search, what shows up can
be overwhelming. I remember very strongly wondering "where the hell do I start?"
Once you do pick somewhere to dip your toe in, the things below make it hard to
get much out of any small chunk.
For my part, I think [his](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=04wyGK6k6HE)
[talks](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=USg3NR76XpQ)
[with](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6T7pUEZfgdI)
[Joe](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Xc7DN-noAc)
[Rogan](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vIeFt88Hm8s) are some of the better
inroads to get started and get an overview of his thinking. And yes, I am aware
of the irony of recommending five three-hour-long podcasts as the best "brief"
overview. If you want shorter, well, that's what this post is for.  

### Everything Links Up

Not only has he put out a lot of stuff, but almost all of that stuff links
together and tells you more about the rest of it. The good news is that as you
learn more, all of it makes more sense and gets richer and deeper. The bad news
is that when you first start, he's very likely talking about stuff that needs a
lot of background that you don't have. As I've waded through more of his stuff,
I've found that *somewhere* in his books or lectures Peterson gives at least one
in-depth, for-beginners walkthrough of almost everything he talks about, but
it's not neatly laid out by things like the video name or summary. Maybe other
folks have made clips that do that, but rarely in his official material. So,
with the thoughts and beliefs he most often relies on, even though there's a
for-beginners rundown somewhere, in most of his talks, he'll take it as given
that you've gotten the thorough rundown before and for this talk he can just
name it or refer back to it in brief and you'll be able to follow along.
Everyone does this with any topic that is big and tough enough, but Peterson
does it with many topics *every single lecture*, so much of it is not very
beginner friendly. If you want to get a good handle on most of the main thoughts
that the rest of his stuff depends on, the "Maps of Meaning" lectures, or the
book by the same name are the the most thorough (Peterson recommends the
audiobook of *Maps of Meaning*, as the inflection and emphasis helps make
complicated points more clear).

### He Goes Off the Path A Lot

The above two points lead straight to this one: even when a lecture or chapter
has a seemingly straightforward name and summary, if you sit down looking for a
smooth, straight walk through only one topic, your hopes will be dashed to tiny
little bits. When you first get into his stuff, this is *rough*, and I say that
as someone with a lifetime of talking in and listening to tangents. When you
don't know much of the background I talked about above, you will often find
yourself asking "what does this have to do with the main point he left?" Over
time, you either work out how those things are linked, or you'll happen to catch
the one lecture where he very clearly lays out how these two thoughts shape each
other. To deal with this one, I'd say that you're best off with something that
calls for a clear main idea: his books, or maybe his series on the Psychological
Significance of the Biblical Stories (which only covers Genesis so far).  

### He Draws A Lot on Other Thinkers

As you'll see below in [The Main Threads of His Thought, As I Understand
Them](#the-main-threads-of-his-thought,-as-i-understand-them), some earlier
thinkers loom very large in Peterson's thinking (Jung, Nietzsche, William James,
and others), and he has read rather widely, so he often brings up the thinking
of someone else. One thing you'll hear from him often is "I learned this from
so-and-so", which is all well and good for giving what you ought to folks who
have shaped your thinking, but can make for rough riding for folks who don't
know them as well.  

### Sometimes He Speaks About Thorny Things in Shorthand

### Some of The Stuff He Deals With is Very Deep

## The Main Threads of His Thought, As I Understand Them

### Consciousness

### Carl Gustav Jung

Jung is very hard to "get" when you have only a thumbnail understanding of him
from high school English or Wikipedia, and his thinking is smarter, deeper, and
weirder than you might look for. Many of the things about Peterson's thinking
above that make it bewildering when you first jump in go twice as much for Jung.
So, when you first hear about the "collective unconscious", you might think
"okay, so everybody's is alike in some ways, got it." Then you start reading him
talking about how, no, it's more than that - folks from unalike lands and times,
who have no way of knowing about each other tell stories or draw marks that are
*very much* alike, way too much to be chance. So is he saying that we have some
linked-up paranormal psychic link? Some shared pool of mind-stuff we all draw
from in some weird ant-like way? Well, no, you read harder and you come to see
that he meant that he's saying that evolution has shaped not only our meaty
brains, but our minds as well, such that the ways we think, most of all the ways
we think when least in control (as in dreams) will be mostly alike with each
other - in the same way that most of us have roughly the same shape of two arms,
two legs, eyes, nose, mouth, and so on, with underlying set up being the same
with only small unalikenesses over that.  

### Friedrich Nietzsche

### Chaos & Order

### God, Religion, and Logos

### Truth

### The Big Five Personality Traits

### Evolution

### Science

### Group vs Individual

### The Risks of Ideology
